In this video,
I want to give you more practical tips for
getting gradient descent to work.
The ideas in this video will center
around the learning rate alpha.
Concretely, here's the gradient
descent update rule.
And what I want to do in
this video is tell you
about what I think of as debugging,
and some tips for
making sure that gradient
descent is working correctly.
And second, I wanna tell you how to
choose the learning rate alpha or
at least how I go about choosing it.
Here's something that I often do to make
sure that gradient descent is working
correctly.
The job of gradient descent is
to find the value of theta for
you that hopefully minimizes
the cost function J(theta).
What I often do is therefore plot
the cost function J(theta) as
gradient descent runs.
So the x axis here is a number of
iterations of gradient descent and
as gradient descent runs you hopefully
get a plot that maybe looks like this.
Notice that the x axis
is number of iterations.
Previously we where looking at plots
of J(theta) where the x axis, where
the horizontal axis, was the parameter
vector theta but this is not what this is.
Concretely, what this point is,
is I'm going to run gradient descent for
100 iterations.
And whatever value I get for
theta after 100 iterations,
I'm going to get some value of
theta after 100 iterations.
And I'm going to evaluate
the cost function J(theta).
For the value of theta I
get after 100 iterations,
and this vertical height
is the value of J(theta).
For the value of theta I got after
100 iterations of gradient descent.
And this point here that corresponds
to the value of J(theta) for
the theta that I get after I've run
gradient descent for 200 iterations.
So what this plot is showing is, is it's
showing the value of your cost function
after each iteration of gradient decent.
And if gradient is working
properly then J(theta)
should decrease after every iteration.
And one useful thing that this sort of
plot can tell you also is that if you look
at the specific figure that I've drawn,
it looks like by the time you've gotten
out to maybe 300 iterations,
between 300 and 400 iterations,
in this segment it looks like
J(theta) hasn't gone down much more.
So by the time you get to 400 iterations,
it looks like this curve
has flattened out here.
And so way out here 400 iterations,
it looks like gradient descent has more or
less converged because your cost
function isn't going down much more.
So looking at this figure can
also help you judge whether or
not gradient descent has converged.
By the way, the number of iterations
the gradient descent takes to converge for
a physical application can vary a lot,
so maybe for
one application, gradient descent may
converge after just thirty iterations.
For a different application, gradient
descent may take 3,000 iterations,
for another learning algorithm,
it may take 3 million iterations.
It turns out to be very difficult to tell
in advance how many iterations gradient
descent needs to converge.
And is usually by plotting this sort of
plot, plotting the cost function as we
increase in number in iterations,
is usually by looking at these plots.
But I try to tell if gradient
descent has converged.
It's also possible to come up
with automatic convergence test,
namely to have a algorithm try to tell
you if gradient descent has converged.
And here's maybe a pretty typical example
of an automatic convergence test.
And such a test may declare convergence
if your cost function J(theta)
decreases by less than
some small value epsilon,
some small value 10 to
the minus 3 in one iteration.
But I find that usually choosing what
this threshold is is pretty difficult.
And so in order to check your
gradient descent's converge
I actually tend to look at plots like
these, like this figure on the left,
rather than rely on
an automatic convergence test.
Looking at this sort of figure can also
tell you, or give you an advance warning,
if maybe gradient descent
is not working correctly.
Concretely, if you plot J(theta) as
a function of the number of iterations.
Then if you see a figure like this
where J(theta) is actually increasing,
then that gives you a clear sign that
gradient descent is not working.
And a theta like this usually means that
you should be using learning rate alpha.
If J(theta) is actually increasing,
the most common cause for
that is if you're trying to minimize
a function, that maybe looks like this.
But if your learning rate is too
big then if you start off there,
gradient descent may overshoot
the minimum and send you there.
And if the learning rate is too big,
you may overshoot again and
it sends you there, and so on.
So that, what you really wanted was for
it to start here and for
it to slowly go downhill, right?
But if the learning rate is too big,
then gradient descent can instead
keep on overshooting the minimum.
So that you actually end
up getting worse and
worse instead of getting to higher
values of the cost function J(theta).
So you end up with a plot like this and
if you see a plot like this,
the fix is usually just to
use a smaller value of alpha.
Oh, and also, of course, make sure
your code doesn't have a bug of it.
But usually too large a value of
alpha could be a common problem.
Similarly sometimes you may also see
J(theta) do something like this,
it may go down for a while then go up then
go down for a while then go up go down for
a while go up and so on.
And a fix for something like this is
also to use a smaller value of alpha.
I'm not going to prove it here,
but under other assumptions about the cost
function J, that does hold true for
linear regression, mathematicians
have shown that if your learning rate
alpha is small enough, then J(theta)
should decrease on every iteration.
So if this doesn't happen probably
means the alpha's too big,
you should set it smaller.
But of course, you also don't want
your learning rate to be too small
because if you do that then the gradient
descent can be slow to converge.
And if alpha were too small,
you might end up starting out here, say,
and end up taking just
minuscule baby steps.
And just taking a lot of iterations
before you finally get to the minimum,
and so if alpha is too small, gradient
descent can make very slow progress and
be slow to converge.
To summarize,
if the learning rate is too small,
you can have a slow convergence problem,
and if the learning rate is too large,
J(theta) may not decrease on every
iteration and it may not even converge.
In some cases if the learning rate is too
large, slow convergence is also possible.
But the more common problem you see is
just that J(theta) may not
decrease on every iteration.
And in order to debug all of these things,
often plotting that J(theta)
as a function of the number of iterations
can help you figure out what's going on.
Concretely, what I actually do
when I run gradient descent
is I would try a range of values.
So just try running gradient
descent with a range of values for
alpha, like 0.001 and 0.01.
So these are factor of ten differences.
And for these different values of alpha
are just plot J(theta) as a function of
number of iterations, and
then pick the value of alpha that seems to
be causing J(theta) to decrease rapidly.
In fact, what I do actually
isn't these steps of ten.
So this is a scale factor
of ten of each step up.
What I actually do is try
this range of values.
And so on, where this is 0.001.
I'll then increase the learning
rate threefold to get 0.003.
And then this step up,
this is another roughly threefold
increase from 0.003 to 0.01.
And so these are, roughly,
trying out gradient descents with each
value I try being about 3x
bigger than the previous value.
So what I'll do is try a range
of values until I've found one
value that's too small and made sure that
I've found one value that's too large.
And then I'll sort of try to pick
the largest possible value, or
just something slightly smaller than
the largest reasonable value that I found.
And when I do that usually it just gives
me a good learning rate for my problem.
And if you do this too, maybe you'll be
able to choose a good learning rate for
your implementation of gradient descent.